[site,docs] Refactor documentation book layout to better separate tops, improve clarity (#19149)
lowRISC/opentitan: hw/top_earlgrey/doc/design/top_generation.md

# Earl Grey Top Generation

Earl Grey is assembled/generated by our in-house integration tool [topgen](../../../../util/topgen/README.md).

## Autogenerated Files warning

The topgen tool autogenerates a number of modules and other files when it runs.
A number of these files have been committed into the repository for browsing
purposes. Please do not modify these files manually:
- `rtl/top_earlgrey.sv`
- The crossbar modules

> - The interrupt controller

Reviewer: And the alert_handler.

## How a top module is created

The top module `rtl/top_earlgrey.sv` is created by `topgen` using the following command:

```bash
../../util/topgen.py -t data/top_earlgrey.hjson -o . -v
```

The data declared in `data/top-earlgrey.hjson` is the single-source-of-truth

> for the autogeneration of collateral for the Earl Grey design.

Reviewer: I really don't like how we use autogeneration to describe this. We generate form templates, not "by oneself", but we cannot change it in a single place when the word is used so pervasively.

Among others, the topgen command generates these files:

- `rtl/top_earlgrey.sv`: Top module generated from the template
    `data/top_earlgrey.sv.tpl` with the configuration file
    `data/top_earlgrey.hjson`
- `rtl/xbar_main.sv` and `rtl/tl_main_pkg.sv`: Crossbar module. Earl Grey has
    only one main crossbar. (tlgen library is used to generate these files.)

> - `rtl/rv_plic*.sv` and `data/rv_plic.hjson`: Interrupt controller module.

Reviewer: This item is incorrect: rv_plic is generated by ipgen: there is no reg_rv_plic.py tool anymore.

    The tool `hw/ip/rv_plic/util/reg_rv_plic.py` is used to create a
    parameterized instantiation of the RV_PLIC HWIP component, which has
    the number of interrupts specified in the Earl Grey `.hjson` data.

Other automated tooling can use the `.hjson` data to generate additional collateral, such
as documentation for the memory map for busses/crossbars in the system. An example of this
is the Earl Grey `TL-UL` system bus, which is presented in the [Design Specification](./README.md#memory-map)
and is generated with the following command:

```bash
util/design/gen-top-docs.py -t hw/top_earlgrey/data/autogen/top_earlgrey.gen.hjson -g mmap
```

## Adding new blocks into the top level

1. Modify `data/top_earlgrey.hjson` to include a new module
   - If new block has interrupts, also add to the `interrupt_module` definition
2. Modify `xbar_main.hjson` for the host / device connectivity

## Modify configurations

Main configuration for Top Earlgrey is declared in `data/top_earlgrey.hjson`.
The users need to specify the list of peripherals, memories, crossbars, and the interrupts

> in the configuration file. The tool then reads relevant information from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the configuration file. The tool then reads relevant information from
```

each peripheral blocks' configuration. For instance, if `uart` module is used,

> the tool reads `hw/ip/uart/data/uart{_reg}.hjson` and parses the information such

Reviewer: Why the {_reg}? There is only uart.hjson.

as input/output, the size of its register space, and interrupts.

For the memories, the tool utilizes the `type` and instantiates relevant modules
including the converter from TL-UL interface to the native interfaces (SRAM,
ROM, eFlash). The user only needs to describe the base address and the memory
size.

The crossbar should be defined in the separate file. Please take a look at
`data/xbar_main.hjson` as an example. In the top configuration, it needs to
define the xbar and the clock, then the tool calls tlgen library to create the
crossbar design. Please remind that the instance name in the crossbar and that
in the module field should be matched for topgen to create fields that tlgen
uses.

## Modify the template

Main top template file is `data/top_earlgrey.sv.tpl`. In most cases, it isn't

> require to modify the template file. For instance, to add new IP into the top,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
required to modify the template file. For instance, to add new IP into the top,
```

the user just needs to add the IP to the `module` field and revise the crossbar
connections in the crossbar configuration.

There might be some cases that needs to revise the template. As of now, a few
modules are hard-coded such as RISC-V core and the debug module. If any of these

> modules need to be revised or some new modules not matching to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
modules need to be revised or some new modules do not meet the
```

> comportability spec, it needs to be manually instantiated in the template file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
comportability spec, they need to be manually instantiated in the template file.
```
